Part Three
Franz Kafka

Gregor's grave wound, from which he suffered for more than a month — the apple, since no one dared to remove it, remained lodged in his flesh as a visible memento — seemed to have reminded even his father that Gregor, for all his present sad and repulsive shape, was a member of the family who must not be treated like an enemy, but toward whom the commandment of family duty was to swallow one's repugnance and to tolerate, to do nothing but tolerate.

And even if Gregor, because of his wound, had probably lost some of his mobility for good, and for the time being needed long, long minutes to cross his room, like an old invalid — climbing about up high was not to be thought of — he nevertheless received, for this deterioration of his condition, what he considered a thoroughly adequate compensation: every day toward evening the living-room door, which he had grown used to watching intently for an hour or two beforehand, was opened, so that he, lying in the darkness of his room and invisible from the living room, could see the whole family at the lamplit table and listen to their conversation, with everyone's permission, so to speak, and therefore quite differently from before.

Admittedly, these were no longer the lively conversations of former times, which Gregor had always recalled with a certain yearning in the small hotel rooms whenever he had had to throw himself, worn out, onto the damp bedclothes. Now things were mostly very quiet. Soon after supper his father would fall asleep in his armchair; his mother and sister would caution each other to keep quiet; his mother, bent far forward into the light, sewed fine lingerie for a fashion house; his sister, who had taken a job as a salesgirl, studied shorthand and French in the evenings so that she might perhaps one day obtain a better post. Sometimes his father woke up and, as though quite unaware that he had been asleep, said to his mother, "What a long time you've been sewing again today!" and fell asleep again at once, while mother and sister exchanged tired smiles.

With a kind of obstinacy his father refused to take off his attendant's uniform even at home; and while his dressing gown hung uselessly on its peg, he slumbered fully dressed in his seat, as though he were always ready for duty and were waiting, even here, for the voice of his superior. As a consequence the uniform, which had not been new even at the start, lost its cleanliness despite all the care his mother and sister gave it, and Gregor would often spend whole evenings gazing at this garment, spotted with stains all over and shining with its ever-polished gold buttons, in which the old man slept, most uncomfortably and yet peacefully.

As soon as the clock struck ten, his mother would try to wake his father by speaking softly to him and then to persuade him to go to bed, for this was no proper sleep, and proper sleep was something his father, who had to begin his duties at six, badly needed. But with the obstinacy that had taken hold of him since he had become an attendant, he always insisted on staying at the table longer, although he regularly fell asleep there, and it then took the greatest effort to induce him to exchange the armchair for the bed. However much mother and sister might press him with little admonitions, he would slowly shake his head for a quarter of an hour at a time, keep his eyes shut and refuse to stand up. His mother tugged at his sleeve and murmured coaxing words into his ear, his sister abandoned her lessons to help her mother, but none of it had any effect on his father. He only sank deeper into his armchair. Not until the women took hold of him under the arms would he open his eyes, look by turns at mother and sister, and say, as was his habit, "What a life. And this is the rest I get in my old age." And, propped on the two women, he would get up, laboriously, as if he were the heaviest of burdens to himself, allow the women to lead him as far as the door, wave them away there and continue on his own, while his mother flung down her sewing and his sister her pen in the greatest haste, so as to run after him and go on helping him.

Who in this overworked and overtired family had time to worry about Gregor more than was absolutely necessary? The household was cut back further and further; the maid was let go after all; a gigantic, bony cleaning woman, with white hair that fluttered around her head, came mornings and evenings to do the heaviest work; everything else his mother saw to, on top of all her sewing. It even happened that various pieces of family jewelry, which his mother and sister had once worn so blissfully at parties and celebrations, were sold, as Gregor learned in the evening from the general discussion of the prices they had fetched. The greatest complaint, however, was always that they could not leave this apartment, which was far too large for their present circumstances, since it was impossible to imagine how Gregor could be moved. But Gregor saw well enough that it was not only consideration for him that stood in the way of a move, for he could easily have been transported in a suitable box with a few air holes; what chiefly kept the family from changing apartments was, rather, their complete hopelessness and the thought that they had been stricken by a misfortune as no one else in their entire circle of relatives and acquaintances had ever been. Whatever the world requires of the poor, they fulfilled to the last degree: his father fetched breakfast for the minor bank clerks, his mother sacrificed herself to the underclothes of strangers, his sister ran to and fro behind the counter at the customers' command, but the family's strength did not stretch any further than that. And the wound in his back began to hurt Gregor as though it were fresh whenever his mother and sister, having got his father to bed, now came back, let their work lie, moved close together and sat cheek to cheek; when his mother, pointing to Gregor's room, would say, "Shut that door over there, Grete," and Gregor was once more in darkness, while next door the women mingled their tears or else stared at the table with dry eyes.

Gregor spent the nights and days almost entirely without sleep. Sometimes he thought that the next time the door opened he would take the family's affairs in hand again just as he used to; in his thoughts, after a long interval, there appeared once more the head of the firm and the chief clerk, the salesmen and the apprentices, the porter who was so slow-witted, two or three friends from other firms, a chambermaid from a hotel in the provinces, a dear, fleeting memory, a cashier from a hat shop whom he had courted earnestly but too slowly — they all appeared, mingled with strangers or people he had already forgotten, but instead of helping him and his family they were, every one of them, out of reach, and he was glad when they vanished. At other times, though, he was in no mood whatever to worry about his family; he was filled with nothing but fury at how poorly he was cared for, and although he could not imagine anything he might have had an appetite for, he nonetheless made plans for how he might get into the pantry in order to take there what was, even if he was not hungry, his due all the same. No longer pausing to consider what might give Gregor particular pleasure, his sister, before rushing off to the shop in the morning and at midday, would hastily shove some food or other into Gregor's room with her foot, only to sweep it out again in the evening with a swish of the broom, indifferent as to whether the food had perhaps just been tasted or — as was most often the case — had been left completely untouched. The tidying of the room, which she now always did in the evening, could not have been done any more hastily. Streaks of dirt ran along the walls, and here and there lay tangles of dust and filth. In the early days Gregor, when his sister arrived, would place himself in some particularly telling corner of this sort, in order, by his very position, to reproach her, as it were. But he could probably have stayed there for weeks without his sister improving; after all, she saw the dirt just as clearly as he did, but she had simply decided to leave it there. At the same time, with a touchiness quite new in her, which had indeed seized the entire family, she saw to it that the cleaning of Gregor's room remained reserved for her. Once his mother had subjected Gregor's room to a thorough cleaning, which she had managed only after using up several buckets of water — all the dampness, to be sure, distressed Gregor as well, and he lay spread flat, bitter and motionless, on the settee — but punishment for his mother was not long in coming. For hardly had his sister noticed the change in Gregor's room that evening than she ran, mortally offended, into the living room and, in spite of her mother's imploringly raised hands, broke into a fit of sobbing, which her parents — his father, of course, had been startled up out of his armchair — watched at first in helpless astonishment; until they, too, began to stir; his father, on his right, reproaching his mother for not leaving the cleaning of Gregor's room to his sister; on his left, by contrast, shouting at his sister that she would never again be allowed to clean Gregor's room; while his mother tried to drag his father, who was beside himself with agitation, into the bedroom; his sister, shaken by sobs, pounded the table with her little fists; and Gregor hissed loudly with rage because it occurred to no one to shut the door and spare him this spectacle and this din.

But even if his sister, exhausted by her work at the shop, had grown weary of caring for Gregor as she once had, it would by no means have been necessary for his mother to take her place, nor would Gregor have needed to be neglected. For now there was the cleaning woman. This old widow, who in her long life had probably come through the very worst with the help of her powerful bony frame, felt no real disgust for Gregor. Without being in any way curious, she had once happened to open the door of Gregor's room and, at the sight of Gregor, who, taken completely by surprise, began to scurry back and forth although no one was chasing him, she had remained standing there in astonishment, her hands folded across her belly. Since then she never failed, morning and evening, to open the door a little, briefly, and peer in at Gregor. At first she would also call him over to her, with words she no doubt thought friendly, such as "Come on over here, you old dung beetle!" or "Just look at the old dung beetle!" To remarks of this sort Gregor made no answer at all, but stayed motionless where he was, as if the door had never been opened. If only this cleaning woman had been given orders to clean his room every day, instead of being allowed to disturb him pointlessly whenever she felt like it! Once, early in the morning — a heavy rain, perhaps already a sign of the coming spring, was lashing the windowpanes — Gregor was so incensed when the cleaning woman started up again with her talk that he turned toward her as if to attack, though slowly and feebly. But the cleaning woman, instead of being frightened, merely raised high in the air a chair that stood near the door, and as she stood there with her mouth wide open, it was clear that she intended to shut her mouth only when the chair in her hand came down on Gregor's back. "So that's as far as you go?" she asked, when Gregor turned back around, and calmly put the chair back in its corner.

Gregor now ate almost nothing at all. Only when he chanced to pass the food that had been set out would he take a bite into his mouth, as a kind of pastime, keep it there for hours and then, as a rule, spit it out again. At first he thought it was sorrow over the state of his room that kept him from eating, but it was precisely to the changes in his room that he very soon grew reconciled. The family had fallen into the habit of putting into this room things that could not be put anywhere else, and there were many such things now, since one room of the apartment had been let to three lodgers. These earnest gentlemen — all three had full beards, as Gregor once ascertained through a crack in the door — were fanatically intent on order, not only in their own room but, since they had after all taken lodgings here, in the entire household, and so in particular in the kitchen. Useless or, worse still, dirty odds and ends they could not tolerate. Besides, they had brought most of their own furnishings with them. For this reason many things had become superfluous which, though they could not be sold, no one wanted to throw away either. All of these migrated into Gregor's room. So too did the ash can and the garbage can from the kitchen. Whatever was of no use at the moment the cleaning woman, who was always in a great rush, simply hurled into Gregor's room; fortunately Gregor usually saw only the object in question and the hand that held it. The cleaning woman may perhaps have intended, when time and occasion permitted, to fetch the things back or to throw the whole lot out at one stroke, but in fact they stayed lying wherever they had landed on being first thrown, unless Gregor wound his way through the jumble and set it moving, at first because he was forced to, since there was no other space left free for crawling, but later with growing enjoyment, although after such wanderings, deathly tired and sad, he would again not stir for hours.

Since the lodgers sometimes took their supper at home as well, in the shared living room, the living-room door stayed closed on a good many evenings, but Gregor quite easily did without its being opened; after all, on many evenings when it had been open he had not made use of it but, without the family noticing, had lain in the darkest corner of his room. Once, however, the cleaning woman had left the door to the living room slightly ajar, and it stayed ajar even when the lodgers came in that evening and the light was put on. They sat down at the head of the table, where in former days his father, his mother and Gregor had sat, unfolded their napkins and took knife and fork in hand. At once his mother appeared in the doorway with a platter of meat, and close behind her his sister with a platter heaped high with potatoes. The food gave off a thick cloud of steam. The lodgers bent over the platters placed in front of them as though they wished to examine them before eating, and indeed the one who sat in the middle, and who seemed to be regarded by the other two as an authority, cut a piece of meat while it was still on the platter, evidently to establish whether it was tender enough or whether it should perhaps be sent back to the kitchen. He was satisfied, and mother and sister, who had been watching tensely, breathed a sigh of relief and began to smile.

The family itself ate in the kitchen. Even so, before going into the kitchen, his father came into this room and, with a single bow, cap in hand, made a round of the table. The lodgers all rose and mumbled something into their beards. Then, once they were alone, they ate in almost complete silence. It seemed peculiar to Gregor that, amid all the various noises of eating, he could again and again make out the sound of their chewing teeth, as though Gregor were meant to be shown by this that one needed teeth in order to eat and that even with the finest toothless jaws one could achieve nothing. "I do have an appetite," Gregor said to himself with concern, "but not for these things. How these lodgers feed themselves, and here I am perishing!"

On that very evening — Gregor could not remember having heard the violin during the whole of this time — it sounded from the kitchen. The lodgers had already finished their supper; the middle one had produced a newspaper and given each of the other two a page, and now they sat leaning back, reading and smoking. When the violin began to play, they grew attentive, rose and went on tiptoe to the door of the front hall, where they stood huddled together. They must have been heard from the kitchen, for his father called out, "Is the playing perhaps disagreeable to the gentlemen? It can be stopped immediately." "On the contrary," said the middle gentleman, "wouldn't the young lady care to come in and join us and play here in this room, where it is surely much more comfortable and pleasant?" "Oh, by all means," cried his father, as if he were the one playing the violin. The gentlemen went back into the room and waited. Soon his father came with the music stand, his mother with the music and his sister with the violin. His sister calmly made everything ready for playing; his parents, who had never let rooms before and therefore overdid their courtesy toward the lodgers, did not even dare to sit down on their own chairs; his father leaned against the door, his right hand pushed in between two buttons of his livery coat, which was buttoned up; his mother, however, was offered a chair by one of the gentlemen and, since she left the chair where the gentleman had happened to set it down, sat off to one side in a corner.

His sister began to play; father and mother, each from their own side, followed the movements of her hands attentively. Drawn by the playing, Gregor had ventured a little farther forward and his head was already in the living room. He scarcely wondered at the fact that lately he had shown so little consideration for the others; there had been a time when this considerateness was his pride. And yet at just this moment he would have had more reason than ever to hide, for as a result of the dust that lay everywhere in his room and flew about at the slightest movement, he too was covered in dust; threads, hairs, bits of leftover food he dragged around with him on his back and along his sides; his indifference to everything was far too great for him to lie on his back, as he had formerly done several times a day, and scrub himself against the carpet. And in spite of this condition he had no qualms about edging a little way forward across the immaculate floor of the living room.

Not that anyone paid attention to him, either. The family was entirely absorbed in the violin playing; the lodgers, on the other hand, who at first, their hands in their trouser pockets, had stationed themselves much too close behind his sister's music stand, so close that they could all have read the music, which was bound to disturb his sister, soon withdrew to the window, talking in low voices with their heads bowed, and there they stayed, anxiously watched by his father. It now truly looked, all too plainly, as if they had been disappointed in their expectation of hearing some beautiful or entertaining violin playing, as if they had had enough of the whole performance and were letting their peace be disturbed only out of politeness. The way in particular in which they all blew the smoke of their cigars high into the air through nose and mouth pointed to great nervousness. And yet his sister was playing so beautifully. Her face was inclined to one side, her eyes following the lines of notes, searching and sorrowful. Gregor crept a little farther forward and held his head close to the floor in order, if possible, to meet her gaze. Was he an animal, if music could grip him so? He felt as though the way to the unknown food he longed for were revealing itself to him. He was determined to press forward all the way to his sister, to tug at her skirt and so give her to understand that she should come into his room with her violin, for no one here repaid her playing the way he wished to repay it. He would not let her out of his room again, at least not as long as he lived; for the first time his terrifying shape would be of use to him; he would be at all the doors of his room at once, spitting and hissing at any attackers; his sister, though, was to stay with him not under compulsion but of her own accord; she was to sit beside him on the settee and bend her ear down to him, and then he would confide to her that he had firmly intended to send her to the conservatory, and that, had the misfortune not come in between, he would have announced it to everyone last Christmas — Christmas had surely come and gone by now? — without paying the least heed to any objections. After this declaration his sister would burst into tears of emotion, and Gregor would raise himself up to her shoulder and kiss her neck, which, since she had started going to work at the shop, she wore bare, without ribbon or collar.

"Mr. Samsa!" the middle gentleman called out to his father, and, without wasting another word, pointed his index finger at Gregor, who was slowly moving forward. The violin fell silent; the middle lodger first smiled at his friends with a shake of his head and then looked back at Gregor. His father seemed to consider it more urgent, instead of driving Gregor away, to calm the lodgers first, even though they were not in the least upset and Gregor seemed to be entertaining them more than the violin playing had. He hurried over to them and tried, with arms spread wide, to push them into their room and at the same time to block their view of Gregor with his body. And now they did in fact become a little angry, though one could no longer tell whether at his father's behavior or at the dawning realization that they had, without knowing it, had a next-door neighbor like Gregor. They demanded explanations from his father, raised their own arms in turn, plucked uneasily at their beards and only slowly backed away toward their room. Meanwhile his sister had overcome the state of bewilderment into which she had fallen after her playing had been so suddenly broken off; having held the violin and bow for a while in her limply dangling hands and gone on looking at the music as though she were still playing, she had all at once pulled herself together, laid the instrument in the lap of her mother, who was still sitting in her armchair, struggling for breath, her lungs laboring violently, and run into the next room, which the lodgers, under pressure from his father, were now approaching more quickly. One could see how, under his sister's practiced hands, the covers and pillows on the beds flew up in the air and arranged themselves. Even before the gentlemen had reached the room, she had finished making up the beds and slipped out. His father seemed once again so possessed by his obstinacy that he forgot all the respect he did, after all, owe his tenants. He kept on pushing and pushing, until, right in the doorway of the room, the middle gentleman stamped his foot with a thunderous noise and so brought his father to a standstill. "I hereby declare," he said, raising his hand and seeking out mother and sister as well with his eyes, "that in view of the disgusting conditions prevailing in this apartment and in this family" — here, with brisk decision, he spat on the floor — "I give notice on my room, effective immediately. Naturally I shall not pay a single penny for the days I have lived here, either; on the contrary, I shall think it over whether I might not bring against you certain claims, which — believe me — will be very easy to justify." He fell silent and gazed straight ahead, as though expecting something. And in fact his two friends promptly joined in with the words: "We, too, give notice, effective immediately." Thereupon he grasped the door handle and shut the door with a bang.

His father staggered to his armchair, feeling his way with his hands, and let himself drop into it; it looked as if he were stretching himself out for his usual evening nap, but the violent nodding of his head, which seemed to have lost all support, showed that he was not asleep at all. All this while Gregor had lain quietly on the spot where the lodgers had caught him. His disappointment at the failure of his plan, but perhaps also the weakness brought on by so much starving, made it impossible for him to move. He feared, with a certain conviction, that at the very next moment a general collapse would come crashing down upon him, and he waited. Not even the violin startled him, as it slipped from beneath his mother's trembling fingers, fell from her lap and gave out a reverberating note.

"Dear parents," said his sister, striking the table with her hand by way of preamble, "things can't go on like this. If you perhaps don't see it, I do. I will not speak my brother's name in front of this monster, and so I will say only this: we have to try to get rid of it. We have done all that is humanly possible to look after it and to put up with it; I don't believe anyone can reproach us in the least."

"She is a thousand times right," said his father to himself. His mother, who still could not get her breath, began to cough dully into the hand she held before her, a crazed look in her eyes.

His sister hurried to her mother and held her forehead. His father seemed to have been brought by his sister's words to more definite thoughts; he had sat up straight and was toying with his attendant's cap among the plates that still stood on the table from the lodgers' supper, and from time to time he looked over at Gregor, lying still.

"We must try to get rid of it," his sister now said, addressing only her father, since her mother, in her coughing, could hear nothing, "it's going to be the death of you both, I can see it coming. When people already have to work as hard as all of us do, they can't put up with this endless torment at home as well. I can't stand it any longer either." And she broke into such violent sobbing that her tears flowed down onto her mother's face, from which she wiped them away with mechanical movements of her hand.

"Child," said her father compassionately and with striking understanding, "but what are we to do?"

His sister merely shrugged her shoulders as a sign of the perplexity that had overcome her now, as she wept, in contrast to her former confidence.

"If he understood us," said her father, half as a question; his sister, from the midst of her tears, waved her hand vehemently to signal that this was not to be thought of.

"If he understood us," her father repeated, and by closing his eyes he absorbed his daughter's conviction that this was impossible, "then perhaps we could come to some agreement with him. But as it is —"

"It has to go," cried his sister, "that is the only remedy, Father. You must simply try to rid yourself of the thought that it is Gregor. That we believed it for so long, that is our real misfortune. But how can it possibly be Gregor? If it were Gregor, he would have seen long ago that human beings cannot live together with such an animal, and he would have gone away of his own free will. Then we would have no brother, but we could go on living and honor his memory. As it is, this animal persecutes us, drives the lodgers away, obviously wants to take over the whole apartment and make us spend our nights in the street. Just look, Father," she suddenly shrieked, "he's starting again!" And in a terror that was utterly incomprehensible to Gregor, his sister even abandoned her mother, practically thrust herself away from her chair, as if she would rather sacrifice her mother than remain near Gregor, and rushed behind her father, who, agitated solely by her behavior, rose as well and half raised his arms in front of her as though to protect her.

But it had never even occurred to Gregor to want to frighten anyone, least of all his sister. He had simply begun to turn around so as to make his way back into his room, and that, admittedly, did look odd, since, owing to his ailing state, he had to help himself through the difficult turns with his head, which in doing so he raised many times and struck against the floor. He stopped and looked around. His good intention seemed to have been recognized; it had only been a momentary fright. Now they all looked at him, silent and sad. His mother lay in her armchair, her legs stretched out and pressed together, her eyes almost falling shut from exhaustion; his father and his sister sat side by side, his sister with her hand placed around her father's neck.

"Now perhaps I may turn around," thought Gregor, and resumed his labor. He could not suppress his panting from the strain and had to rest now and then as well. For the rest, no one was hurrying him; it was all left to him. When he had completed the turn, he immediately began to head straight back. He was amazed at the great distance separating him from his room, and could not understand at all how, in his weakness, he had covered the same ground only a short while before, almost without noticing it. Intent solely on crawling quickly, he hardly noticed that not a word, not a cry from his family interrupted him. Only when he was already in the doorway did he turn his head, not all the way, for he felt his neck growing stiff; even so, he could still see that nothing behind him had changed, only his sister had stood up. His last glance brushed over his mother, who was now fast asleep.

Hardly was he inside his room when the door was hurriedly pushed shut, bolted and locked. Gregor was so startled by the sudden noise behind him that his little legs buckled under him. It was his sister who had been in such a hurry. She had already been standing there upright, waiting, and then she had sprung forward lightly, Gregor had not heard her coming at all, and "At last!" she cried to her parents as she turned the key in the lock.

"And now?" Gregor asked himself, and looked around in the darkness. He soon discovered that he could no longer move at all. This did not surprise him; rather, it struck him as unnatural that until now he had actually been able to get about on these thin little legs. Otherwise he felt relatively comfortable. True, he had pains all over his body, but it seemed to him that they were gradually growing weaker and weaker and would finally go away altogether. The rotten apple in his back and the inflamed area around it, which was completely covered in soft dust, he hardly felt any more. He thought back on his family, touched and full of love. His own conviction that he had to disappear was, if possible, even more decided than his sister's. He remained in this state of blank and peaceful musing until the tower clock struck three in the morning. He still witnessed the start of the general lightening beyond the window. Then, without his willing it, his head sank all the way down, and from his nostrils his last breath flowed weakly out.

When the cleaning woman arrived early in the morning — out of sheer strength and haste she banged all the doors, however often she had been asked not to, so hard that once she had come there was no more peaceful sleep to be had anywhere in the apartment — she found nothing out of the ordinary at first during her usual brief visit to Gregor. She thought he was lying there so motionless on purpose, playing the offended party; she credited him with every conceivable kind of intelligence. Because she happened to have the long broom in her hand, she tried to tickle Gregor with it from the doorway. When that too produced no result, she became annoyed and jabbed at Gregor a little, and only when she had shoved him from his place without meeting any resistance did she begin to pay attention. When she soon realized the true state of affairs, her eyes grew wide and she gave a low whistle, but she did not linger; instead she tore open the door of the bedroom and called loudly into the darkness: "Come and take a look, it's croaked; there it lies, croaked good and proper!"

The Samsa couple sat bolt upright in their marriage bed and had their hands full getting over their alarm at the cleaning woman before they could take in what she was telling them. But then Mr. and Mrs. Samsa, each on their own side, climbed hurriedly out of bed; Mr. Samsa threw the blanket over his shoulders, Mrs. Samsa came out in only her nightgown; and so they entered Gregor's room. In the meantime the door of the living room had opened too, where Grete had been sleeping since the lodgers moved in; she was fully dressed, as if she had not slept at all, and her pale face seemed to bear this out. "Dead?" said Mrs. Samsa, and looked up inquiringly at the cleaning woman, although she could have examined everything herself and could have recognized it even without examining. "I should think so," said the cleaning woman, and to prove it she pushed Gregor's corpse a good way farther to one side with the broom. Mrs. Samsa made a movement as if to hold back the broom, but did not do it. "Well," said Mr. Samsa, "now we can thank God." He crossed himself, and the three women followed his example. Grete, who never took her eyes off the corpse, said: "Just look how thin he was. Of course, he hadn't eaten anything for such a long time. The food went out again just the way it came in." And indeed Gregor's body was completely flat and dry; one really saw this only now that it was no longer raised up on its little legs and nothing else drew the eye away.

"Come in with us for a little while, Grete," said Mrs. Samsa with a wistful smile, and Grete, not without looking back at the corpse, followed her parents into the bedroom. The cleaning woman closed the door and opened the window wide. Early as it was in the morning, the fresh air already had some mildness mixed into it. It was the end of March already, after all.

The three lodgers came out of their room and looked around in surprise for their breakfast; they had been forgotten. "Where is the breakfast?" the middle gentleman asked the cleaning woman grumpily. She, however, laid her finger to her lips and then hastily and silently beckoned to the gentlemen to come into Gregor's room. They did come, and then stood, hands in the pockets of their somewhat worn little jackets, around Gregor's corpse in the room, which by now was fully light.

Then the door of the bedroom opened, and Mr. Samsa appeared in his livery, his wife on one arm and his daughter on the other. All of them showed some signs of weeping; now and then Grete pressed her face against her father's arm.

"Leave my apartment at once!" said Mr. Samsa, and pointed at the door without letting go of the women. "What do you mean by that?" said the middle gentleman, somewhat disconcerted, and gave a sugary smile. The other two held their hands behind their backs and rubbed them together incessantly, as though in joyful expectation of a great quarrel which, however, was bound to end in their favor. "I mean exactly what I say," replied Mr. Samsa, and advanced, abreast with his two companions, toward the lodger. The latter at first stood still and looked at the floor, as if the things in his head were arranging themselves into a new order. "Well, then, we shall go," he said, and looked up at Mr. Samsa as though, in a humility that had suddenly come over him, he were asking for fresh approval even for this decision. Mr. Samsa merely nodded at him several times, briefly, with wide eyes. Upon this the gentleman did indeed go at once with long strides into the front hall; his two friends had been listening for a little while, their hands now perfectly still, and they now positively hopped along after him, as though afraid that Mr. Samsa might step into the hall ahead of them and cut them off from their leader. In the hall all three took their hats from the coat rack, pulled their canes out of the cane stand, bowed silently and left the apartment. With a mistrust that proved to be entirely groundless, Mr. Samsa stepped out onto the landing with the two women; leaning on the banister, they watched the three gentlemen go slowly but steadily down the long staircase, disappearing on each floor at a certain bend of the stairwell and emerging again a few moments later; the farther down they got, the more the Samsa family's interest in them faded, and when a butcher's boy, bearing his tray on his head with a proud carriage, came climbing up toward them and then on up, high above them, Mr. Samsa soon left the banister with the women, and they all went back into their apartment, as if relieved.

They decided to spend this day resting and going for a walk; they had not only earned this break from work, they positively needed it. And so they sat down at the table and wrote three letters of excuse, Mr. Samsa to his management, Mrs. Samsa to her employer, and Grete to the owner of her shop. While they were writing, the cleaning woman came in to say that she was leaving, since her morning's work was done. At first the three writers merely nodded without looking up; only when the cleaning woman still showed no intention of going did they look up in irritation. "Well?" asked Mr. Samsa. The cleaning woman stood smiling in the doorway, as though she had some great piece of good fortune to announce to the family but would do so only if she were thoroughly questioned. The little ostrich feather standing almost upright on her hat, which had irritated Mr. Samsa for as long as she had been in their service, swayed lightly in every direction. "Well, what is it you want, then?" asked Mrs. Samsa, of whom the cleaning woman was still most in awe. "Yes," the cleaning woman answered, and could not go on straight away for good-natured laughter, "well, you needn't worry about how to get rid of that stuff next door. It's all been seen to." Mrs. Samsa and Grete bent down over their letters as though they meant to keep writing; Mr. Samsa, who saw that the cleaning woman was now about to start describing everything in detail, firmly fended this off with an outstretched hand. But since she was not allowed to tell her story, she remembered what a great hurry she was in, called out, plainly offended, "Bye now, one and all," spun around furiously and left the apartment with a terrible slamming of doors.

"She'll be dismissed this evening," said Mr. Samsa, but got no answer either from his wife or from his daughter, for the cleaning woman seemed to have unsettled again the calm they had only just regained. They rose, went to the window and stayed there, holding each other close. Mr. Samsa turned around in his chair toward them and watched them quietly for a little while. Then he called out: "Come on, come over here. Leave all that old business alone now, once and for all. And have a little consideration for me as well." The women obeyed him at once, hurried over to him, caressed him and quickly finished their letters.

Then all three of them left the apartment together, something they had not done for months, and took the tram out into the open country beyond the town. The car, in which they sat alone, was shot through with warm sunlight. Leaning back comfortably in their seats, they talked over their prospects for the future, and found that on closer inspection these were not bad at all, for the positions of all three of them, about which they had never actually questioned one another in any detail, were exceedingly favorable and especially promising for later on. The greatest immediate improvement in their situation would of course come easily from a change of apartment; they now wanted to take a smaller and cheaper apartment, but one better situated and in every way more practical than the present one, which Gregor had chosen. While they were chatting like this, it struck Mr. and Mrs. Samsa, almost at the same moment, as they looked at their daughter, who was growing livelier and livelier, how, in spite of all the caretaking that had made her cheeks pale, she had lately blossomed into a lovely, full-figured girl. Growing quieter, and communicating almost unconsciously through glances, they reflected that it would soon be time to find her a good, decent husband as well. And it seemed to them like a confirmation of their new dreams and good intentions when, on arriving at their destination, their daughter was the first to rise, stretching her young body.
