An Honest Account
Ömer Seyfettin

Mehmet Efendi had been living in the town for ten years. His fields, vineyards and orchards in the village had been left in the hands of sharecroppers. As he was pouring out his troubles to his dear friend, the Mufti Hacı Ali Efendi:

"I count it all as burned to ashes. There isn't a single honest man left in the world," he said.

The Mufti, who believed in the existence of virtue and goodness as firmly as in his religion:

"There are, but you just can't find them," he said, shaking his head.

Mehmet Efendi boiled over:

"No, no, no! By God, by God, there aren't! Everyone's a liar, everyone's a swindler. There isn't a kinsman or relative left that I haven't tried. Even my own brother cheated me."

"Then go and sit over your property yourself."

"You're right. 'Own a ship, stand at its stern... own a farm, live on it...' But what can I do? I can't leave my business here."

"Sell what you have in the village."

"They've all ganged up. No one will buy."

......

The Mufti Efendi knew that honesty and virtue still existed in the world. But how was he to prove it? Those who, like Mehmet Efendi, fell victim to the tricks of the wicked were losing their faith as well. As time went on, a day would come when no one would trust anyone anymore.

"There's a shepherd I know. He's very honest!" he said.

"A shepherd?"

"Yes..."

Mehmet Efendi pulled a bitter, sour face, as if a new wound had been opened on top of an old one:

"Oh, those shepherds!" he said, heaving a deep sigh. "Out of my fifteen hundred sheep, they left me fifty in the end."

"Very well, give these fifty sheep to the honest man I'm telling you about. Let him turn them into a hundred!"

......

Mehmet Efendi laughed:

"You're joking."

"I mean it."

The Mufti began to describe the shepherd he knew. He was a man who had no idea in the world what a lie was. He was utterly simple, a dervish of a man. He spent his life in the mountains and pastures. To his five daily prayers he added five more.

The more the Mufti praised him, the more Mehmet Efendi softened:

"Well, we might as well give him those sheep of mine," he said.

The next day they sent word up to the summer pastures. They had the shepherd summoned to the town. Mehmet Efendi came to an agreement with him in the Mufti's presence. The shepherd would graze the fifty sheep, and one fifth of the profit the fifty sheep brought in would be his. The sheep were fetched from the village. The shepherd set off with this little flock and was gone. Days, weeks, months went by. Whenever Mehmet Efendi ran into the Mufti:

"If this shepherd turns out to be honest, I'll hand over all my affairs in the village to him as well," he would say.

"You'll see, you'll see!"

"God willing..."

A year later, one Friday morning, as Mehmet Efendi was sitting in the room on the ground floor of his house, he found the "Honest Shepherd" standing before him. In his hands were a big earthenware bowl and a wet fleece. Without so much as a greeting, he set these down on the windowsill beside the divan:

"Welcome?"

"Glad to be here!"

"Sit down, then..."

"Thank you kindly!"

"What news of the sheep? Didn't they lamb?"

The shepherd replied:

"Turns out they were all barren!" he said.

"Not one of them lambed?"

"No."

"What did you do with their wool?"

"I hadn't sheared them yet."

Mehmet Efendi didn't understand:

"What do you mean?"

"Twelve of them were stolen."

"And?"

"How many does that leave?"

"Thirty-eight."

"Thirty-two of them caught the fluke last autumn and died."

"And?"

"How many does that leave?"

"Six."

"The wolf ate five..."

"How many does that leave?"

"One!..."

"Well, I was looking after that one sheep like the apple of my eye. I milked her the evening before last. I made this yogurt from her milk. Yesterday morning, as we were coming down from the pasture, the poor thing tumbled over a cliff. I climbed down and went to her, and what do I find — she's dead. I skinned her before she'd even gone cold. Here's the fleece."

The shepherd was pointing to the wet hide by the window. Mehmet Efendi clutched his grizzled beard with his left hand. First he flushed red, then he went pale. The shepherd would not stop talking:

"The yogurt comes to two and a half okkas... Half an okka of it is mine. My share of the sheepskin I make you a present of!"

Mehmet Efendi didn't make a sound. He stood up. He picked up the bowl of yogurt and slowly came up to the "Honest Shepherd." With all his strength he brought the full bowl down over the man's head:

"There's your share, you scoundrel!" he cried, and began pummeling him. Kicking him all the way, he threw him out the door!

Just then the Mufti Efendi had come to visit his friend. Seeing the shepherd at the door with his face covered in yogurt, he was astonished and asked:

"Man alive, what's happened to you?"

The simple shepherd seemed bewildered by the injustice done to him. But even so, he had not lost his logic. In a tone of bitter reproach:

"What else, sir?" he said. "This is how a man who gives an honest account walks out the door — his face white with honor."
