Part One
Franz Kafka

When Gregor Samsa woke one morning from restless dreams, he found that he had been changed in his bed into some monstrous kind of vermin. He was lying on his back, which was as hard as armor plating, and when he raised his head a little he could see his domed brown belly, divided by arch-shaped ribs, on top of which the bedspread, ready to slide off altogether, could barely keep its hold. His many legs, pitifully thin compared with the rest of his bulk, flickered helplessly before his eyes.

"What has happened to me?" he thought. It was no dream. His room, a proper human room, only rather too small, lay quiet between its four familiar walls. Above the table, on which a collection of cloth samples lay unpacked and spread out — Samsa was a traveling salesman — hung the picture he had recently cut out of an illustrated magazine and put into a pretty gilt frame. It showed a lady, fitted out with a fur hat and a fur boa, who sat upright and held out toward the viewer a heavy fur muff into which her whole forearm had vanished.

Gregor's gaze then turned to the window, and the dismal weather — raindrops could be heard striking the window ledge — made him quite melancholy. "What if I went on sleeping a little longer and forgot all this nonsense," he thought; but that was entirely impossible, for he was used to sleeping on his right side, and in his present state he could not get himself into that position. However hard he threw himself onto his right side, he always rocked back onto his back again. He must have tried it a hundred times, closing his eyes so as not to have to see his wriggling legs, and only gave up when he began to feel in his side a slight, dull ache he had never felt before.

"Oh God," he thought, "what a strenuous job I've chosen! Traveling day in, day out. The business worries are far greater than in the actual business back at the office, and on top of that I'm saddled with the torment of traveling, the worry about train connections, the irregular, bad meals, and human contact that keeps changing, never lasts and never grows warm. The devil take it all!" He felt a slight itch high up on his belly; slowly pushed himself on his back closer to the bedpost so as to lift his head better; found the itching spot, which was covered with nothing but small white dots he could make no sense of; and wanted to feel the place with one of his legs, but drew it back at once, for at the touch cold shivers ran over him.

He slid back into his former position. "This getting up early," he thought, "makes a man quite idiotic. A man must have his sleep. Other salesmen live like women in a harem. When I go back to the inn in the course of the morning, for instance, to write out the orders I've taken, these gentlemen are only sitting down to breakfast. I should try that with my boss; I'd be thrown out on the spot. Who knows, by the way, whether that wouldn't be a very good thing for me. If I didn't hold back for my parents' sake, I would have given notice long ago; I would have gone up to the boss and told him what I think from the bottom of my heart. He would have fallen off his desk! It's a strange way of doing things, too, to sit on the desk and talk down from on high to the employee, who on top of it has to come right up close because the boss is hard of hearing. Well, I haven't given up hope entirely; once I've got the money together to pay off my parents' debt to him — it should take another five or six years — I'll do it without fail. Then I'll make the great break. For the time being, though, I have to get up, since my train leaves at five."

And he looked over at the alarm clock ticking on the wardrobe. "Heavenly Father!" he thought. It was half past six, and the hands were calmly moving on; it was even past the half hour and already nearing a quarter to seven. Could the alarm not have gone off? From the bed one could see that it had been properly set for four o'clock; surely it had rung, too. Yes, but was it possible to sleep calmly through that furniture-shaking ringing? Well, he had not slept calmly, but probably all the more soundly for it. But what was he to do now? The next train went at seven; to catch it he would have had to hurry like mad, and the collection was not yet packed, and he himself did not feel at all particularly fresh and lively. And even if he caught the train, a storm from the boss could not be avoided, for the office boy had been waiting at the five o'clock train and had long since reported his absence. He was the boss's creature, without backbone or brains. What if he reported sick? But that would be extremely awkward and suspicious, for in his five years of service Gregor had not been ill even once. The boss would certainly come with the health insurance doctor, reproach his parents for their lazy son and cut short every objection by pointing to the insurance doctor, for whom there were only people who were perfectly healthy but shy of work. And would he, for that matter, be so entirely wrong in this case? Apart from a sleepiness that was really superfluous after such a long sleep, Gregor did in fact feel quite well and even had a particularly hearty appetite.

While he was turning all this over in the greatest haste without being able to make up his mind to leave the bed — the alarm clock was just striking a quarter to seven — there was a cautious knock at the door by the head of his bed. "Gregor," a voice called — it was his mother — "it's a quarter to seven. Didn't you mean to go?" That gentle voice! Gregor was startled when he heard his own voice answering; it was unmistakably his old voice, but mixed into it, as if from below, was an irrepressible, painful squeaking that left the words clear only at the first moment, then so garbled them as they faded that one could not tell whether one had heard rightly. Gregor had wanted to answer at length and explain everything, but under these circumstances he limited himself to saying: "Yes, yes, thank you, Mother, I'm getting up now." Because of the wooden door the change in Gregor's voice was probably not noticeable outside, for his mother was satisfied with this explanation and shuffled away. But the little exchange had made the other members of the family aware that Gregor, contrary to expectation, was still at home, and already his father was knocking at one of the side doors, feebly, but with his fist. "Gregor, Gregor," he called, "what is it?" And after a short while he urged him again in a deeper voice: "Gregor! Gregor!" At the other side door, however, his sister was softly lamenting: "Gregor? Aren't you well? Do you need anything?" Gregor answered in both directions: "I'm ready now," and did his best, by pronouncing each word with the greatest care and putting long pauses between them, to take away everything that was odd about his voice. His father did go back to his breakfast, but his sister whispered: "Gregor, open the door, I beg you." Gregor, however, had no intention whatever of opening it, and instead congratulated himself on the caution he had picked up from traveling, of locking all the doors at night, even at home.

First of all he wanted to get up quietly and undisturbed, get dressed and above all have breakfast, and only then think over what came next, for he could well see that in bed his thinking would come to no sensible conclusion. He remembered having often felt in bed some slight pain or other, perhaps caused by lying awkwardly, which had then turned out to be pure imagination once he got up, and he was curious to see how today's fancies would gradually dissolve. That the change in his voice was nothing but the forerunner of a proper chill, an occupational illness of traveling salesmen, he did not doubt in the least.

Throwing off the bedspread was quite simple; he only had to puff himself up a little and it fell off by itself. But after that it became difficult, especially because he was so uncommonly broad. He would have needed arms and hands to raise himself up; instead of these, however, he had only the many little legs, which were constantly moving in every possible way and which, on top of that, he could not control. If he tried for once to bend one of them, the first thing it did was stretch out; and if he finally managed to make this leg do what he wanted, all the others meanwhile worked away as if set free, in the highest, most painful agitation. "Just don't lie about uselessly in bed," Gregor told himself.

At first he wanted to get out of the bed with the lower part of his body, but this lower part, which incidentally he had not yet seen and of which he could not form any clear idea, proved too hard to move; it went so slowly; and when at last, having grown almost frantic, he gathered all his strength and recklessly thrust himself forward, he had chosen the wrong direction, struck hard against the foot of the bed, and the burning pain he felt taught him that the lower part of his body was, at the moment, perhaps the most sensitive of all.

So he tried to get the upper part of his body out of the bed first, and carefully turned his head toward the edge of the bed. This went easily, too, and despite its breadth and weight the mass of his body at last slowly followed the turn of his head. But when he finally held his head out beyond the bed in the open air, he grew afraid to move forward any further in this way, for if he ended up letting himself fall like that, it would take nothing short of a miracle for his head not to be injured. And he must not lose consciousness now of all times, at any price; he would rather stay in bed.

But when, after the same effort, he lay there sighing as before and again saw his little legs fighting one another, if possible even worse than before, and found no way of bringing calm and order into this chaos, he told himself again that he could not possibly stay in bed and that the most sensible thing was to sacrifice everything if there were even the slightest hope of freeing himself from the bed by doing so. At the same time, however, he did not forget to remind himself now and then that calm, the very calmest reflection was far better than desperate decisions. At such moments he fixed his eyes as sharply as he could on the window, but unfortunately there was little confidence or cheer to be had from the sight of the morning fog, which veiled even the other side of the narrow street. "Seven o'clock already," he said to himself as the alarm clock struck again, "seven o'clock already and still such a fog." And for a little while he lay quietly, breathing faintly, as though perhaps he expected the complete silence to bring back the real and natural state of things.

But then he said to himself: "Before it strikes a quarter past seven, I must without fail be completely out of bed. Besides, by then someone from the firm will come to ask after me, since the firm opens before seven." And now he set about rocking his body out of the bed, its whole length evenly, all at once. If he let himself fall out of bed in this way, his head, which he meant to lift sharply as he fell, would presumably remain unhurt. His back seemed to be hard; nothing would happen to it when it fell on the carpet. What worried him most was the thought of the loud crash there was bound to be, which would probably cause, if not terror, then at least anxiety behind all the doors. But that had to be risked.

When Gregor was already sticking halfway out of the bed — the new method was more a game than an effort; he only ever needed to rock himself in jerks — it occurred to him how simple everything would be if someone came to help him. Two strong people — he thought of his father and the maid — would have been quite enough; they would only have had to push their arms under his arched back, peel him out of the bed that way, bend down with their load and then simply wait carefully while he swung himself over onto the floor, where his little legs would then, he hoped, find some purpose. Well, quite apart from the fact that the doors were locked, should he really have called for help? In spite of all his distress he could not suppress a smile at the thought.

He had already got so far that, when he rocked harder, he could hardly keep his balance any longer, and very soon now he would have to make his final decision, for in five minutes it would be a quarter past seven — when the doorbell of the apartment rang. "That's someone from the firm," he told himself and almost froze, while his little legs only danced all the faster. For a moment everything was still. "They're not opening," Gregor told himself, caught up in some absurd hope. But then of course, as always, the maid went to the door with a firm step and opened it. Gregor only needed to hear the visitor's first word of greeting and he already knew who it was — the chief clerk himself. Why was Gregor alone condemned to serve a firm where the slightest lapse at once aroused the greatest suspicion? Were all the employees scoundrels one and all, was there not a single loyal, devoted man among them who, if he had failed to make use of just a couple of morning hours for the firm, was driven half mad by pangs of conscience and was literally unable to leave his bed? Was it really not enough to send an apprentice to inquire — if this inquiring was necessary at all — did the chief clerk have to come himself, and did the whole innocent family have to be shown in this way that the investigation of this suspicious affair could be entrusted only to the chief clerk's judgment? And more as a result of the agitation these reflections put him into than as a result of any real decision, Gregor swung himself out of the bed with all his might. There was a loud thump, but not really a crash. The fall was softened a little by the carpet, and his back was also more elastic than Gregor had thought; hence the dull sound, which was not so very noticeable. Only he had not held his head carefully enough and had bumped it; he turned it and rubbed it on the carpet in annoyance and pain.

"Something fell in there," said the chief clerk in the room to the left. Gregor tried to imagine whether something like what had happened to him today might not also happen to the chief clerk one day; one really had to admit that it was possible. But as if in blunt reply to this question the chief clerk now took a few decided steps in the next room and made his patent-leather boots creak. From the room to the right his sister whispered, to let Gregor know: "Gregor, the chief clerk is here." "I know," said Gregor to himself; but he did not dare raise his voice loud enough for his sister to hear.

"Gregor," his father now said from the room to the left, "the chief clerk has come and wants to know why you didn't leave on the early train. We don't know what to tell him. Besides, he wants to speak to you in person. So please open the door. He will surely be kind enough to excuse the untidiness of the room." "Good morning, Mr. Samsa," the chief clerk called out in a friendly way at the same time. "He isn't well," his mother said to the chief clerk while his father was still talking at the door, "he isn't well, believe me, sir. How else would Gregor miss a train! The boy has nothing in his head but the business. It almost annoys me that he never goes out in the evening; he's been in town for eight days now, but every evening he was at home. He sits with us at the table and quietly reads the paper or studies timetables. It's a distraction for him even to busy himself with fretwork. In the course of two or three evenings, for instance, he carved a little frame; you'll be amazed how pretty it is; it's hanging in his room; you'll see it as soon as Gregor opens up. I'm glad you're here, by the way, sir; we alone would never have got Gregor to open the door; he's so stubborn; and he's certainly not well, even though he denied it this morning." "I'm coming right away," said Gregor slowly and deliberately, and did not move, so as not to lose a word of the conversation. "I can't explain it any other way either, madam," said the chief clerk, "I hope it's nothing serious. Though on the other hand I must say that we businessmen — unfortunately or fortunately, as you like — very often simply have to overcome a slight indisposition for the sake of business." "So can the chief clerk come in to you now?" asked his impatient father, knocking on the door again. "No," said Gregor. In the room to the left there fell an awkward silence; in the room to the right his sister began to sob.

Why didn't his sister go to the others? She had probably only just got out of bed and had not even begun to dress. And why was she crying? Because he did not get up and did not let the chief clerk in, because he was in danger of losing his position and because the boss would then pursue his parents with the old demands again? Surely those were needless worries for the time being. Gregor was still here and did not have the slightest thought of leaving his family. For the moment he was lying there on the carpet, of course, and no one who knew his condition would seriously have asked him to let the chief clerk in. But Gregor could hardly be dismissed on the spot for this small discourtesy, for which a suitable excuse would easily be found later. And it seemed to Gregor that it would be far more sensible to leave him in peace now instead of disturbing him with tears and pleading. But it was precisely the uncertainty that was troubling the others and excused their behavior.

"Mr. Samsa," the chief clerk now called in a raised voice, "what is the matter? You barricade yourself in your room, answer only with yes and no, cause your parents serious and needless worry and neglect — I mention this only in passing — your duties to the firm in a truly unheard-of manner. I am speaking here in the name of your parents and of your employer, and I ask you in all seriousness for an immediate, clear explanation. I am astonished, astonished. I believed I knew you as a calm, sensible person, and now you suddenly seem to want to start parading strange whims. This morning the boss did hint to me at a possible explanation for your absence — it concerned the collection of payments recently entrusted to you — but I very nearly gave my word of honor that this explanation could not be right. Now, however, I see your incomprehensible obstinacy here, and I lose all desire whatsoever to put in even the least word for you. And your position is by no means the most secure. I originally intended to tell you all this in private, but since you make me waste my time here for nothing, I don't know why your good parents should not hear it too. Your performance recently, then, has been very unsatisfactory; it is not the season for doing exceptional business, we recognize that; but a season for doing no business at all does not exist, Mr. Samsa, must not exist."

"But, sir," cried Gregor, beside himself, forgetting everything else in his agitation, "I'm opening the door at once, this very moment. A slight indisposition, a dizzy spell, kept me from getting up. I'm still lying in bed now. But I'm quite fresh again already. I'm just getting out of bed. Just a moment's patience! It isn't going as well as I thought yet. But I'm feeling well already. How a thing like that can come over a man! Only last night I was quite all right, my parents know it, or rather, even last night I had a slight foreboding. People must have been able to see it in me. Why didn't I report it at the office! But one always thinks one will get over an illness without staying at home. Sir! Spare my parents! There's no reason for all the reproaches you're making me now; nobody ever said a word to me about any of it. Perhaps you haven't read the last orders I sent. Anyway, I'll still set out on my trip with the eight o'clock train; these few hours of rest have given me strength. Don't let me keep you, sir; I'll be at the office myself in a moment, and please be so kind as to tell them so and give my respects to the boss!"

And while Gregor blurted all this out in a rush, hardly knowing what he was saying, he had moved easily up to the wardrobe, probably thanks to the practice he had already gained in bed, and was now trying to raise himself up against it. He really did want to open the door, really let himself be seen and speak with the chief clerk; he was eager to find out what the others, who were now clamoring for him so, would say when they saw him. If they were frightened, then Gregor had no further responsibility and could be calm. But if they took everything calmly, then he too had no reason to get upset and could, if he hurried, actually be at the station by eight. At first he slid off the smooth wardrobe a few times, but at last he gave himself one final swing and stood upright; he no longer paid any attention to the pains in his lower body, however much they burned. Now he let himself fall against the back of a nearby chair and held on to its edges with his little legs. With that, however, he had also gained control of himself and fell silent, for now he could listen to the chief clerk.

"Did you understand a single word?" the chief clerk asked his parents. "He isn't making fools of us, is he?" "For God's sake," cried his mother, already in tears, "perhaps he's seriously ill, and we're tormenting him. Grete! Grete!" she then screamed. "Mother?" called his sister from the other side. They were talking to each other through Gregor's room. "You must go to the doctor at once. Gregor is ill. Quick, fetch the doctor. Did you hear Gregor talking just now?" "That was the voice of an animal," said the chief clerk, strikingly quietly compared with his mother's screaming. "Anna! Anna!" his father called through the hall into the kitchen, clapping his hands, "fetch a locksmith at once!" And already the two girls were running through the hall with rustling skirts — how had his sister got dressed so quickly? — and flinging open the front door of the apartment. There was no sound of the door slamming at all; they had probably left it open, as tends to happen in homes where a great misfortune has occurred.

Gregor, however, had become much calmer. So they no longer understood his words, even though they had seemed clear enough to him, clearer than before, perhaps because his ear had grown used to them. But at any rate they now believed that something was not quite right with him and were ready to help him. The confidence and assurance with which the first measures had been taken did him good. He felt himself drawn back into the human circle and hoped for great and surprising feats from both of them, the doctor and the locksmith, without really distinguishing between them. In order to have as clear a voice as possible for the decisive discussions that were approaching, he coughed a little to clear his throat, taking care, however, to do it quite softly, since even this noise might sound different from a human cough, which he no longer trusted himself to judge. In the next room, meanwhile, it had become completely quiet. Perhaps his parents were sitting at the table with the chief clerk, whispering; perhaps they were all leaning against the door, listening.

Gregor slowly pushed himself toward the door with the chair, let go of it there, threw himself against the door, held himself upright against it — the pads of his little legs had a little sticky substance on them — and rested there for a moment from the exertion. But then he set about turning the key in the lock with his mouth. Unfortunately it seemed that he had no real teeth — what was he to grip the key with? — but his jaws, to be sure, were very strong; with their help he really did get the key moving, and paid no attention to the fact that he was undoubtedly doing himself some harm, for a brown liquid came out of his mouth, ran over the key and dripped onto the floor. "Just listen," said the chief clerk in the next room, "he's turning the key." That was a great encouragement for Gregor; but they all should have called out to him, his father and mother too: "Go on, Gregor," they should have called, "keep at it, keep at that lock!" And imagining that everyone was following his efforts intently, he bit down on the key senselessly with all the strength he could muster. As the key turned further, he danced around the lock; now he was holding himself upright only by his mouth, and as needed he either hung on the key or pressed it down again with the whole weight of his body. The brighter sound of the lock finally snapping back fairly woke Gregor up. Breathing a sigh of relief, he said to himself: "So I didn't need the locksmith after all," and laid his head on the handle to open the door fully.

Since he had to open the door in this way, it was actually already opened quite wide while he himself could not yet be seen. He first had to turn himself slowly around the one wing of the door, and very carefully at that, if he did not want to fall flat on his back just before entering the room. He was still busy with this difficult maneuver and had no time to pay attention to anything else when he already heard the chief clerk let out a loud "Oh!" — it sounded like the wind whistling — and now he could see him too: nearest to the door, he was pressing his hand against his open mouth and slowly backing away, as if driven off by an invisible force acting steadily upon him. His mother — in spite of the chief clerk's presence she was standing there with her hair still loose from the night and bristling up high — first looked at his father with her hands clasped, then went two steps toward Gregor and sank down in the midst of her skirts, which spread out all around her, her face sunk out of sight on her breast. His father clenched his fist with a hostile expression, as if he meant to push Gregor back into his room, then looked uncertainly around the living room, then shaded his eyes with his hands and wept until his mighty chest shook.

Gregor did not step into the room at all, but leaned from inside against the firmly bolted wing of the door, so that only half of his body could be seen and, above it, his head tilted to one side, with which he peered across at the others. Meanwhile it had grown much lighter; on the other side of the street a section of the endless gray-black building opposite stood out clearly — it was a hospital — with its regular windows sharply breaking up its front; the rain was still falling, but only in large drops, visible one by one and seemingly flung down to the ground one at a time. The breakfast dishes stood on the table in overabundant number, for to his father breakfast was the most important meal of the day, which he drew out for hours while reading various newspapers. On the wall directly opposite hung a photograph of Gregor from his time in the army, showing him as a lieutenant, his hand on his sword, smiling carefree, demanding respect for his bearing and his uniform. The door to the hall was open, and since the front door of the apartment was open too, one could see out onto the landing and the top of the stairs leading down.

"Well," said Gregor, fully aware that he was the only one who had kept calm, "I'll get dressed right away, pack up the collection and be off. Will you, will you let me go? Well, sir, you see, I'm not stubborn and I like to work; traveling is hard, but I couldn't live without traveling. Where are you going, sir? To the office? Yes? Will you report everything truthfully? A man may be unable to work for the moment, but that is just the right time to remember what he has done before and to consider that later, once the obstacle has been removed, he will surely work all the harder and with all the more concentration. I'm so very much obliged to the boss, you know that perfectly well. On the other hand, I have the worry about my parents and my sister. I'm in a fix, but I'll work my way out of it again. Only don't make it harder for me than it already is. Take my side at the office! People don't like the traveling salesman, I know. They think he earns a fortune and has a fine life of it. They simply have no particular reason to think this prejudice through more carefully. But you, sir, you have a better view of how things stand than the rest of the staff, indeed, just between ourselves, a better view even than the boss himself, who, in his capacity as the owner, easily lets his judgment be swayed to an employee's disadvantage. You also know very well that the traveling salesman, who is away from the office almost the whole year, can so easily fall victim to gossip, chance mishaps and groundless complaints, against which it is quite impossible for him to defend himself, since mostly he hears nothing about them at all, and only when he has finished a trip, exhausted, does he come to feel at home, on his own body, the grim consequences whose causes can no longer be traced. Sir, don't go away without saying a word to me that shows me you agree with me at least a little!"

But at Gregor's very first words the chief clerk had already turned away, and he only looked back at Gregor over his twitching shoulder with his lips curled. And during Gregor's speech he did not stand still for a moment, but withdrew toward the door without taking his eyes off Gregor, yet very gradually, as though there were some secret ban on leaving the room. He was already in the hall, and from the sudden movement with which he drew his foot out of the living room for the last time, one might have thought he had just burned the sole of his foot. In the hall, however, he stretched his right hand out far in front of him toward the stairs, as if some downright unearthly deliverance were waiting for him there.

Gregor realized that he must on no account let the chief clerk leave in this mood if his position with the firm was not to be put in the utmost danger. His parents did not understand all this so well; over the long years they had come to believe that Gregor was provided for in this firm for life, and besides, they now had so much to do with their immediate worries that they had lost all foresight. But Gregor had this foresight. The chief clerk had to be held back, calmed, convinced and finally won over; Gregor's future and his family's depended on it, after all! If only his sister had been here! She was clever; she had already cried while Gregor was still lying quietly on his back. And surely the chief clerk, this ladies' man, would have let himself be guided by her; she would have shut the front door and talked him out of his fright in the hall. But his sister was not there, and Gregor had to act himself. And without thinking that he did not yet know his present abilities to move at all, without thinking either that his speech had possibly, indeed probably, not been understood again, he let go of the wing of the door; pushed himself through the opening; meant to go over to the chief clerk, who was already holding on to the railing of the landing with both hands in a ridiculous way; but at once, groping for a hold, fell down with a little cry onto his many little legs. Hardly had this happened when, for the first time that morning, he felt a sense of physical well-being; his little legs had solid ground beneath them; they obeyed him perfectly, as he noticed to his joy; they even strove to carry him wherever he wanted; and he already believed that the final end of all his suffering was close at hand. But at the very same moment, as he lay there on the floor rocking with restrained movement, not far from his mother, just opposite her, she, who had seemed so completely lost in herself, suddenly leaped up, her arms stretched out wide, her fingers spread, and cried: "Help, for God's sake, help!"; held her head bent as if to see Gregor better, but, contradicting this, ran senselessly backward; had forgotten that the laid table stood behind her; sat down on it hastily, as if absent-mindedly, when she reached it, and did not seem to notice at all that beside her the coffee was pouring in a full stream from the large overturned pot onto the carpet.

"Mother, Mother," said Gregor softly, looking up at her. For a moment the chief clerk had gone completely out of his mind; instead, at the sight of the flowing coffee, he could not stop himself from snapping his jaws at the empty air several times. At this his mother screamed again, fled from the table and fell into the arms of his father, who was hurrying toward her. But Gregor had no time for his parents now; the chief clerk was already on the stairs; with his chin on the railing, he looked back one last time. Gregor took a run so as to be as sure as possible of catching up with him; the chief clerk must have sensed something, for he took a leap down several steps and disappeared; "Ugh!" he still screamed, though, and it rang through the whole stairwell. Unfortunately this flight of the chief clerk now seemed to throw his father, who until then had been relatively composed, into complete confusion as well, for instead of running after the chief clerk himself or at least not hindering Gregor from pursuing him, he seized with his right hand the chief clerk's walking stick, which he had left behind on an armchair together with his hat and overcoat, took a large newspaper from the table with his left, and, stamping his feet, set about driving Gregor back into his room by waving the stick and the newspaper. No pleading of Gregor's helped, and no pleading was understood either; however humbly he turned his head, his father only stamped his feet harder. Across the room his mother had flung open a window in spite of the cool weather, and leaning out she pressed her face into her hands far outside the window. Between the street and the stairwell a strong draft arose, the curtains flew up, the newspapers on the table rustled, single sheets blew across the floor. Relentlessly his father pressed on, hissing like a savage. Now Gregor had no practice at all in walking backward, and it really went very slowly. If only Gregor had been allowed to turn around, he would have been in his room at once, but he was afraid of making his father impatient by the time-consuming turn, and at any moment the stick in his father's hand threatened him with a deadly blow on the back or on the head. In the end, however, Gregor had no other choice, for he noticed with horror that, walking backward, he could not even keep to his direction; and so, with constant anxious sideways glances at his father, he began to turn around as quickly as possible, which in reality was nonetheless only very slowly. Perhaps his father noticed his good will, for he did not disturb him in this, but even directed the turning movement here and there from a distance with the tip of his stick. If only there had not been this unbearable hissing of his father's! It made Gregor lose his head completely. He had already turned almost all the way around when, always listening to this hissing, he even made a mistake and turned back a little way again. But when at last he was happily in front of the doorway with his head, it turned out that his body was too broad to get through without further ado. It did not even remotely occur to his father, in his present state of mind, to open the other wing of the door, say, to make a sufficient passage for Gregor. His one fixed idea was only that Gregor must get into his room as quickly as possible. He would never have allowed the elaborate preparations Gregor needed in order to raise himself up and perhaps get through the door that way. Perhaps, as though there were no obstacle, he was now driving Gregor forward with a particular din; behind Gregor it no longer sounded at all like the voice of a single father; now it was really no joke anymore, and Gregor forced himself — come what may — into the doorway. One side of his body rose up, he lay crooked in the doorway, one of his flanks was rubbed quite raw, ugly stains were left on the white door, soon he was stuck fast and could not have moved by himself any more, the little legs on one side hung trembling up in the air, those on the other were painfully pressed to the floor — then his father gave him from behind a strong shove that was now truly a deliverance, and he flew, bleeding heavily, far into his room. The door was slammed shut with the stick, and then at last there was silence.
